---
title: "1. Hello World"
style: chapter page-1
---

Thinking on the Syllabus

These short notes are an attempt to make sense of the syllabus. The syllabus consists of a range of complicated techniques. When I see a student preparing for a grade, they are focussed and worried about accomplishing each technique. But the technique is not what you actually need to demonstrate in the grading, although you obviously need to know the technique. The 18 Principles was a first attempt to describe the ideas underlying my Aikido. These notes attempt to discuss the requirements of each grade with the 18 Principles in mind, and specifically to think about how each technique demonstrates some aspect of Aikido. Perhaps it is a roadmap to how one might approach the syllabus, the route to shodan, and a brief sketch of what I hope people look for beyond.

Remember that I am not a senior instructor. Think of these notes instead as my own working notes on what I'm trying to encourage in my dojo. Use them as a measure of your progress: don't try to measure yourself by the techniques you know. As Bruce Lee said, “I don't fear the person who has practiced ten thousand techniques once. I fear the person who has practiced one technique ten thousand times.”

# The 18 Principles

## Basic Principles

1. Posture: Stand straight. Keep your head up.
2. Movement: Move from your legs, your hips and your lower back.
3. Relax.
4. Feeling: Sense your partner's movement.
5. Response: Respond to your partner's movement.
6. Care: Care for yourself and for your partner.
## Intermediate Principles
7. Weight: use the natural weight of your body.
8. Extension: Extend your attention beyond your body.
9. Connection: connect yourself and your partner with a spring.
10. Waiting: wait for the waza to form.
11. Listening: Be continuously aware of the feeling of your partner.
12. Pressure: throughout the waza, keep the pressure the same.
## Advanced Principles
13. Invitation: invite uke's attack.
14. Wrapping: wrap the whole of uke (and beyond) in the waza.
15. Kuzushi: take uke's centre.
16. Acceptance and Forgiveness: accept the attack, and allow it to pass.
17. Trust the Waza: trust that the waza is enough.
18. Beginner's and Master's Mind: Know that your waza will succeed. 

# 6th Kyu
There are only 3 principles I want to see in 6th kyu.

You need to take care of your partner, and take care of yourself. In your ukemi, I want to see that you are rolling carefully and being sure not to hurt or endanger yourself. When you are tori, executing the technique, you are being careful for the person you are throwing. Especially at 6th kyu, this means going softly and slowly. You need to be aware that your partner might not roll well, so be especially sensitive to any mistakes they might make. Aikido should be painless, and your partner should feel safe practicing with you.

The second principle you must demonstrate is posture. Keep your back straight and upright, and lower yourself by going down in the knees, not bending over. When you have pinned uke, be sure that your back is still straight, and that you are looking out.

Think about your posture throughout the grading, not just while you are doing a technique or taking ukemi. When you are seated, when you bow, make sure your back is straight and your head up.

Yamaguchi Sensei said that a grading should require nothing more than the bow-in. Just watching your bow, one can tell everything about your Aikido. There is no trick to this – there is not a clever way of bowing. Be sincere, be attentive, lay your awareness evenly across the dojo. This awareness is both very advanced, and something you can practice from your first day in the dojo. It is not a paranoia – you are not about to be attacked at any moment! It is a mindfulness, a keeping yourself gently aware of everything, without grasping at anything.

The third principle I want to see in 6th kyu is movement from the body, not from the arms. Make sure you are moving your body with every technique. If your posture is good and your body is in the right position, you won't need to push or pull, or use your arms at all. As you move your body, uke will be moved with you.

I also want to see movement when you are taking ukemi. Don't be frantic, but think about how you are moving. You are attacking, and you want to keep tori, who is doing the technique, in your sight. So make sure you turn towards them, that you try to keep a feeling in yourself that you are attacking, very softly, but quite persistently.

Beyond the basic forms you learn for 6th kyu, I want to see that you are thinking about the difference between front and back: omote and ura. There are only 2 techniques – ikkyo and shihonage – that you show in both omote and ura form. Think carefully about this distinction, not just where you put your feet and place your body, and experiment with the distance between yourself and uke: is one or the other easier if you are closer or further apart? Try to feel the different sensation of going backwards or going forwards. Think carefully about the timing of omote or ura.

# 5th Kyu

In 5th Kyu, I still want to see all the principles of 6th kyu. This holds true for every level – build upon and improve what has come before.

I also want to see that you are not resorting to strength, but rather using softness and relaxation to make the techniques happen. I want to see an increased attentiveness to your partner. While in 6th kyu I'm happy just to see movement and following tori, at 5th kyu and 4th kyu, I really want to see that you are working on ukemi, that you are listening to your partner, sensing what they are doing, and responding to their movement.

In the techniques of 5th kyu, there are 3 broad themes that I want to see in your practice. The idea of omote (inside) and ura (outside) is really important. Especially with the gyakuhanmi waza, there are distinctions in how the waza begins, where your body moves and how you move uke. At 5th kyu I want to see that you are thinking about these differences, about how they feel, both as tori and as uke.

Shomenuchi is the new attack for 5th kyu, and I want to see that you are doing it clearly, that it is an effective strike, done softly, with care and attention to your partner.

The 3rd big item in 5th kyu is suwariwaza. What I look for in suwariwaza is comfort. You are establishing a basis for suwariwaza that you will be practicing for the rest of your life, so you need to discover a way to do this that is comfortable and natural. Therefore, when you are practicing these techniques, continually ask yourself how you might feel more comfortable doing this.

Watch your posture very carefully. Because you are lower, it is easier to balance, but it is also more difficult to regain your balance.

In all suwariwaza – in fact in everything – do not emphasize speed. Work on the quality of the movement. Is it free, is it soft, are you relaxed?

# 4th Kyu

In 4th kyu, I expect to see the first 6 Principles becoming natural. Both as tori and as uke, I want to see responsiveness coupled with relaxation.

At a technical level, 4th kyu only really introduces tenchinage, and some new attacks: ryotetori, yokomenuchi and chudantsuki. As uke, execute these clearly and with control, but still softly. You mustn't throw yourself away in the technique. Rather, sustain a relationship with tori. Make sure that you return to your centre after the attack. Do not position yourself awaiting the waza.

At 4th kyu, more than before, you are demonstrating the same technique from diverse attacks. I expect to see that sense of familiarity with the technique, and an appreciation of the differences dictated by different attacks. When you practice for 4th kyu, remember this: these are techniques you know, they are becoming part of your practice. You are primarily demonstrating the ability to find the techniques from different starting points.

In preparing for 4th kyu, ask yourself how uke feels. The different attacks create different dynamics in uke's body – where is their balance, what is their momentum, how are their limbs arranged? Be very aware that, while you are creating the same waza in uke, you are doing so from different initial moments, doing so within different parameters.

Use 4th kyu preparation as an opportunity to explore this theme: “the same, but different.”

# 3rd Kyu

By 3rd kyu, you've pretty much seen all the techniques before. You're demonstrating the same techniques from different attacks. The big distinction is the introduction of ushiro-waza. You have to control an uke who is going behind you. In these techniques, I want to see an awareness of your back, and the ability to sense and respond to uke even when they are behind you.

There are many ways to do ushirowaza. For me, the emphasis should be on sensitivity.

At 3rd kyu level, your practice should also be exploring the 6 Intermediate Principles. I want to see the use of weight and extension. You should be able to create and maintain a connection, both as tori and as uke. Waiting and listening are both principles that are essential for ushirowaza, as they are everywhere. At 3rd kyu I'm also expecting to see a constant pressure maintained throughout your practice – at this level I don't expect to see any jerking or dragging. I expect to see you connecting with uke and keeping the connection softly and evenly throughout.

# 2nd Kyu

By 2nd kyu I expect that the waza are becoming routine. There is a new attack, katatori menuchi, and a few other more obscure attacks, but you should be taking these in your stride, using these as a platform to explore and demonstrate that you listen to uke, respond to their attack, and lead them into the waza you want to form without pushing or fighting.

In 2nd kyu, consolidate the Intermediate Principles.

Your ukemi should be looking good. You are presenting tori with a direct and determined attack that isn't hard, but that is continuous. When you are thrown, or taken into a lock, you maintain the connection with tori, and keep that throughout the practice. You are gentle but responsive, able to lead a beginner through a waza, but also able to challenge a senior student without forcing anything.

# 1st Kyu and Shodan

1st kyu is really a preparation for shodan. It is 'Shodan Lite'.

By 1st Kyu, I expect the techniques to be second nature. Tom Dijkman Sensei says, “I should be able to wake you up at three in the morning and say, 'Ushiro ryotetori koshinage', and you should do the technique before you're even awake.”

I don't expect to see any struggling or fumbling. This is not to say I expect every technique to work perfectly every time. I do expect that when a technique doesn't work, you investigate from first principles: you don't compromise your posture, you stay soft and responsive, and above all you take the utmost care not to hurt uke.

I expect you to be consolidating the Intermediate Principles and starting to demonstrate the Advanced Principles. There should be inviting, there should be kuzushi, there should be wrapping, and by now you should have confidence in your waza.

Shodan I consider less of a grading and more of a demonstration. Show that you know the basic forms of all the techniques, that you can perform them calmly, softly and cleanly under grading conditions. Show that you can control uke, and care for them.

Shodan is the 'beginner's grade', the stage at which one really begins to study Aikido. Now you know the form of the techniques. Now you start making them your own.

# Nidan

By Nidan, I want to see that you have started searching outside. You should be looking at other teachers, visiting other dojos, and attending seminars. You should be doing this on an international stage - not just looking inside South Africa, but looking throughout the world. Do you like Endo Sensei, or Yamada Sensei? Tada Sensei, or Tissier Sensei? Or someone else? Use YouTube to get some ideas, but go to seminars to feel their practice. Travel and practice at their dojos. There is no substitute. If you can't afford to travel, invite the teachers here. Work with your Aikido federation to get enough interest, then find a way to get the teachers to travel to you.

At this point, your waza should be fluid and natural. The Advanced Principles, and others that you discover or learn, should be the focus of your practice.

# Sandan

By Sandan, I want to see you. At this point technique should be excellent. You should be able to easily handle groups of attackers. You should be able to play.

Within the dojo I expect you to teach. I want to see that you can share what you know, that you can practice softly and carefully with beginners, and vigorously and carefully with seniors.

I want to see that you assist senior students preparing for Shodan. I want to see that there are students who follow you. I expect them to attend other classes, but I want to hear from students, "Ah, I really like her Aikido" when we talk about their favourites. Your Aikido is becoming distinctive, your style unique.

# Yondan

At this stage, you should have found your teacher who does the Aikido that you want to pursue, the Aikido that speaks to you. This teacher should grade you for Yondan.

Within the dojo I want to see that you have become a senior teacher. I would like to see some students grading for Shodan who trace their influence to you from their beginning in Aikido. You should be able to point to some Shodan and say, "Those are my students."
